                                                    Impact of non-stationarity on hybrid ensemble filters:
                                                              A study with a doubly stochastic
                                                              advection-diffusion-decay model∗
arXiv:1708.08794v3 [physics.data-an] 23 Feb 2020




                                                                          Michael Tsyrulnikov and Alexander Rakitko
                                                                                       (michael.tsyrulnikov@gmail.com)

                                                                                            February 25, 2020


                                                                                                   Abstract
                                                                Effects of non-stationarity on the performance of hybrid ensemble filters are stud-
                                                            ied (by hybrid filters we mean those which blend ensemble covariances with some
                                                            other regularizing covariances). To isolate effects of non-stationarity from effects
                                                            due to nonlinearity (and the non-Gaussianity it causes), a new doubly stochastic
                                                            advection-diffusion-decay model (DSADM) is proposed. The model is hierarchical:
                                                            it is a linear stochastic partial differential equation whose coefficients are random
                                                            fields defined through their own stochastic partial differential equations. DSADM
                                                            generates conditionally Gaussian spatiotemporal random fields with a tunable de-
                                                            gree of non-stationarity in space and time. DSADM allows the use of the exact
                                                            Kalman filter as a baseline benchmark.
                                                                In numerical experiments with DSADM as the “model of truth”, the rel-
                                                            ative importance of the three kinds of covariance blending is studied: with
                                                            static, time-smoothed, and space-smoothed covariances. It is shown that the
                                                            stronger the non-stationarity, the less useful the static covariance matrix becomes
                                                            and the more beneficial the time-smoothed covariances are. Time-smoothing of
                                                            background-error covariances proved to be systematically more useful than their
                                                            space-smoothing. Under non-stationarity, a filter that extends the (previously pro-
                                                            posed by the authors) Hierarchical Bayes Ensemble Filter and accommodates the
                                                            three covariance-blending techniques is shown to outperform all other configura-
                                                            tions of the filters tested. The R code of the model and the filters is available from
                                                            github.com/cyrulnic/NoStRa.

                                                          Keywords: Non-stationary spatiotemporal random field, Hierarchical modeling, Advection-diffusion-
                                                   decay model, EnKF, Hybrid ensemble filters, Hierarchical Bayes Ensemble Filter, Data assimilation.
                                                          Running head: Impact of non-stationarity on hybrid filters
                                                      ∗
                                                       This is the accepted version of the article published in final form in Quart. J. Roy. Meteorol. Soc.,
                                                   2019, v. 145, N 722, 2255–2271, DOI: 10.1002/QJ.3556.


                                                                                                       1
1     Introduction
Ensemble Kalman filters (EnKF) estimate background-error covariances from an ensem-
ble of forecasts. The resulting sample covariances are noisy and rank deficient if the
ensemble size is not greater than the dimensionality of the covariance matrix (which is
typically the case in geosciences). A kind of regularization (that is, introduction of addi-
tional information to stabilize the solution) is needed to make them a useful estimate of
true background-error covariances. Two regularization techniques are most popular: lo-
calization and hybridization. Our focus in this study is on the second technique, in which
sample covariances are blended (mixed) with some regularizing covariances and which we
therefore call “covariance blending”.
    From the literature, we can identify three main types of covariance blending. First,
hybrid ensemble-variational filters (EnVar) employ blending with static “climatological”
covariances (Hamill & Snyder 2000, Lorenc 2003, Buehner et al. 2013). In statistical
literature this regularization device is known as a shrinkage estimator (Ledoit & Wolf
2004). Second, in the Hierarchical Bayes Ensemble Filter (HBEF) by Tsyrulnikov &
Rakitko (2017), ensemble covariances are blended with time-smoothed recent-past covari-
ances. The idea of accommodating recent-past background-error statistics has also been
explored by other authors: Gustafsson et al. (2014) use time-lagged ensemble members,
Berre et al. (2015) use ensemble members from past 4 days to increase the ensemble
size, Bonavita et al. (2016) use ensemble covariances from previous 12 days to estimate
their parametric covariance model, Lorenc (2017) found that using time-lagged and time-
shifted perturbations increases the effective ensemble size. Third, Buehner & Charron
(2007), Ménétrier et al. (2015), Ménétrier & Auligné (2015) studied spatial smoothing of
ensemble covariances, which also can be considered as covariance blending, this time with
neighboring covariances in space.
    With any of the above kinds of covariance blending, the intention is to reduce sampling
noise and increase the rank of the covariance matrix — but at the expense of reducing
flow dependence (the main advantage of ensemble statistics) in the blended covariances.
The question arises: what are the optimal weights of the regularizing covariances in the
blend and which factors do they depend on?
    First of all, we notice that if a data assimilation system is stationary, that is, its true
(actual) spatial error covariances do not change in time, then there is no need for an
(on-line) ensemble at all. Indeed, with constant-in-time background-error covariances, all
one has to do is to carefully estimate (off-line) their spatial covariance matrix (through
temporal averaging of innovation-based or ensemble covariances). In the Gaussian case,
the estimated static covariance matrix will be optimal (see, e.g., Theorem 2.38 in Ku-
mar & Varaiya 2015, for a formal statement). Thus, we conclude that only under non-
stationarity ensemble filters can outperform data assimilation schemes that employ static
background-error covariances. True background-error covariances in a data assimilation
scheme are non-stationary either if the system is governed by a non-stationary model or


                                              2
the observation network is changing in time (or both, of course). In this research, our
focus is on non-stationarity caused by the model. To study the impact of non-stationarity
on the optimal design of hybrid filters we seek a toy model that is capable of producing
spatiotemporal fields with tunable non-stationarity.
    Most toy models used in data assimilation studies are nonlinear. The simplest mod-
els have just a few variables, like the Ikeda model (Hansen & Smith 2001), the double
well model (Miller et al. 1994), and the most popular three-variable Lorenz’63 model
(Lorenz 1963). Models defined on a 1D spatial domain include, among others, the viscous
Burgers equation (Apte et al. 2010), the Korteweg–de Vries equation (Muccino & Ben-
nett 2002), and the most popular Lorenz’96 and Lorenz’2005 models (Lorenz & Emanuel
1998, Lorenz 2005). In nonlinear models, the tangent-linear model operator, generally,
varies in time, giving rise to non-stationarity (flow-dependence) of filtering probability
distributions. However, with nonlinear models, non-stationarity is inevitably intertwined
with nonlinearity of the evolution of filtering errors and their ensuing non-Gaussianity. To
disentangle effects due to nonlinearity from effects of non-stationarity, we propose a model
that gives rise to non-stationary filtering distributions while being linear and Gaussian.
    We build the model on the time-discrete scalar (i.e., one-variable) model introduced
by Tsyrulnikov & Rakitko (2017):

                                    ξk = Fk ξk−1 + σk αk ,                               (1)

where ξk is the (scalar) true system state, k labels the time instant, Fk is the (scalar)
model operator, σk is the standard deviation of the forcing, and αk ∼ N (0, 1) is the
driving white noise. The model is doubly stochastic (e.g. Tjøstheim 1986), which means
that not only the forcing αk is random, the coefficients Fk and σk are random sequences
by themselves, each defined through its own stochastic model similar to Eq.(1) but with
a constant model operator and constant magnitude of the forcing. Conditionally on the
processes Fk and σk (that is, after their realizations are computed and kept fixed), Eq.(1)
is a linear model with time-varying coefficients (e.g. Chatfield 2016, Section 11.2.1), whose
solution is a non-stationary random process. In this study we extend the model Eq.(1)
to the spatiotemporal context. The result is a new doubly stochastic advection-diffusion-
decay model (DSADM), whose solutions are non-stationary conditionally Gaussian ran-
dom fields.
    The general idea of non-stationary random field modeling by assuming that param-
eters of a spatial or spatiotemporal model are random fields themselves is discussed by
several authors. Piterbarg & Ostrovskii (2013) study an advection-diffusion model whose
coefficients are random fields with prescribed covariance functions. Lindgren et al. (2011)
allow a length-scale parameter and a variance parameter of their stochastic partial differ-
ential equation to slowly vary in space (by expanding them in a set of basis functions).
Banerjee et al. (2015, sec. 11.6) mention the possibility of formulating a stochastic differ-
ential equation for parameters of another stochastic differential equation. Roininen et al.
(2016) use a stochastic elliptic equation to model a spatial random field and introduce

                                              3
a hypermodel for its local length scale to achieve non-stationarity; the hypermodel em-
ploys the same stochastic elliptic equation. Dunlop et al. (2018) discuss (among others)
more general Gaussian hierarchical processes, which are defined through a hierarchy of
levels so that at each level, the conditional probability distribution is Gaussian given the
previous (parent) level. Our innovation is the non-stationary hierarchical model with
spatiotemporal stochastic partial differential equations at two levels in the hierarchy. The
particular pattern of the non-stationarity (that is, how the field’s variance, local space
and time scales, etc. vary in space-time) is random, and its spatiotemporal structure is
highly tunable by the model’s hyperparameters.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In sections 2–5 we motivate, describe,
and examine in numerical experiments the new DSADM model. In section 6 we introduce
a new hybrid-HBEF (named HHBEF) filter, which accommodates the three covariance-
blending techniques mentioned above. In section 7 we present results of numerical ex-
periments with hybrid ensemble filters showing the crucial impact of non-stationarity on
the filters’ performance and optimal design. Efficient numerical implementation of hybrid
filters is beyond the scope of this study.
     The R code of the doubly stochastic model, the filters, and the R scripts that produced
this paper’s numerical results are available from https://github.com/cyrulnic/NoStRa.
More detailed texts on the DSADM’s numerical scheme, generation of initial conditions,
specification of model parameters, etc. can also be found there.


2     Stochastic advection-diffusion-decay model with
      constant coefficients
To introduce notation and motivate the new doubly stochastic advection-diffusion-decay
model, we theoretically examine here statistics of solutions to a stationary stochastic
advection-diffusion-decay model with non-stochastic and constant coefficients (parame-
ters). Specifically, we identify how the model parameters affect the variance, the spatial
scale, and the time scale of the solution. This is a preparatory section with largely back-
ground material.


2.1    Model
The model is the following stochastic partial differential equation (Whittle (1986, Ch. 20,
Sec. 3), Lindgren et al. (2011, Eq.(17)), Sigrist et al. (2015)):
                               ∂ξ     ∂ξ          ∂ 2ξ
                                   +U     + ρξ − ν 2 = σα,                              (2)
                               ∂t     ∂s          ∂s
where t is time, s is the spatial coordinate on the circle S1 (R) of radius R, U is the
advection velocity, ρ is the decay (damping) parameter, ν is the diffusion parameter,
α(t, s) is the standard white (in space and time) Gaussian noise, and σ is the intensity of
the forcing. The four parameters θ = (U, ρ, ν, σ) are constant in space and time.

                                             4
2.2     Stationary spatiotemporal statistics
We start with rewriting Eq.(2) using the material time derivative (i.e., along the charac-
teristic s = s0 + U t), or, equivalently, switching to the Lagrangian frame of reference by
making the change of variables (t, s) 7→ (t, s − U t):

                                        dξ         ∂ 2ξ
                                           + ρξ − ν 2 = σα.                                              (3)
                                        dt         ∂s
Next, we employ the spectral expansion in space (retaining only those spectral components
that are resolved on the regular spatial grid with n points),
                                                  n/2
                                                  X
                                    ξ(t, s) =              ξ˜m (t) eims/R                                (4)
                                                m=−n/2+1

and
                                                  n/2
                                                  X
                                   α(t, s) =               α̃m (t) eims/R ,                              (5)
                                                m=−n/2+1

where i is the imaginary unit and ξ˜m (t) and α̃m (t) are the (complex) spectral coeffi-
cients. It can be shown (e.g. Tsyrulnikov & Gayfulin 2016, Appendix A.4) that α̃m (t) are
independent standard complex-white-noise processes ωm (t) with the common intensity
       √
a = 1/ 2πR:
                                     α̃m (t) = a ωm (t).                              (6)
Now, we substitute Eqs.(4)–(6) into Eq.(3), getting

                                  dξ˜m        ν
                                       + (ρ + 2 m2 )ξ˜m = aσωm (t).                                      (7)
                                   dt        R
This is the spectral-space form of the model Eq.(3). It is easily seen that if ρ + Rν2 m2 >
0, the solutions to Eq.(7) for different m become, after an initial transient, mutually
independent stationary zero-mean random processes1 .
    This implies that the physical-space solution ξ(t, s) becomes a zero-mean random
field that is stationary in time and space. Note that by definition, the zero-mean real-
valued random field (process) ξ(t, s) is (second-order) stationary if its spatiotemporal
covariance function γ(t1 , s1 ; t2 , s2 ) = E ξ(t1 , s1 ) ξ(t2 , s2 ) is invariant under translations:
E ξ(t1 , s1 ) ξ(t2 , s2 ) = E ξ(t1 + u, s1 + v) ξ(t2 + u, s2 + v) and thus is a function of the space
and time shifts only: γ(t, s) = E ξ(t1 , s1 ) ξ(t1 + t, s1 + s). Here periodicity in the spatial
coordinate s is of course assumed, ξ(t, s) = ξ(t, s + 2πR).
    Each elementary stochastic process ξ˜m (t) is an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (e.g.
Arnold 1974, sec. 8.3) with the stationary covariance function

                                         Bm (t) = bm · e−|t|/τm ,                                        (8)
   1
    Indeed, the influence of the initial condition on ξ˜m (t) exponentially decays in time, leaving ξ˜m (t)
dependent only on the noise process ωm (t0 ) for 0 ≤ t0 ≤ t. The mutual independence of ξ˜m (t) for different
m then follows from the mutual independence of the driving noises ωm (t).


                                                     5
where the spectral variances bm are

                                            a2 σ 2       1
                                     bm =          ·                                              (9)
                                              2      ρ + Rν2 m2

and the spectral time scales τm are
                                                     1
                                       τm =                  .                                   (10)
                                                ρ + Rν2 m2

Note that Eq.(10) provides the motivation for the inclusion of the decay term in the
model. Indeed, with ρ = 0, the time scale τ0 would be infinitely large, which, on the finite
sphere, is unphysical (specifying b0 = 0 could resolve the problem but only at the expense
of nullifying ξ˜0 , which is also unphysical).
     The stationary in space-time covariance function γ(t, s) of the random field ξ(t, s) can
be easily derived from Eq.(4) while utilizing the independence of the spectral processes
ξ˜m (t), the spectral-space temporal covariance functions given in Eq.(8), and returning to
the Eulerian frame of reference:
                                       n/2
                                       X
                         γ(t, s) =              bm e−|t|/τm eim(s−U t)/R .                       (11)
                                     m=−n/2+1


Note that Eq.(11) implies that the space-time correlations are non-separable, i.e., they
cannot be represented as a product of purely spatial and purely temporal correlations.
Moreover, according to Eq.(10), smaller spatial scales (i.e., larger wavenumbers m) corre-
spond to smaller time scales τm . This feature of space-time correlations (“proportionality
of scales”) is physically reasonable—as opposed to the simplistic and unrealistic separabil-
ity of space-time correlations—and widespread in the real world, see Tsyroulnikov (2001),
Tsyrulnikov & Gayfulin (2017) and references therein.
    Finally, from Eq.(11), the stationary (steady-state) variance of ξ(t, s) is
                                       n/2                             n/2
                               2
                                       X              a2 σ 2           X            1
               Var ξ ≡ (SD(ξ)) =                 bm =                                        ,   (12)
                                                        2                       ρ + Rν2 m2
                                     m=−n/2+1                        m=−n/2+1


where SD stands for standard deviation.


2.3    Roles of model parameters
Firstly, we note that U does not impact the variance spectrum and the spectral time
scales of ξ (see Eqs.(9) and (10)), its role is just to rotate the solution with the constant
angular velocity U/R.
    Secondly, Eq.(9) implies that the shape of the spatial spectrum is
                                            1                    1
                               bm ∝              ∝              ,                                (13)
                                      ρ + Rν2 m2   1 + ( mm0 )2


                                                 6
                p
where m0 = R ρ/ν is the characteristic non-dimensional wavenumber, which defines
the width of the spectrum and thus the field’s length scale. Therefore, the latter can be
defined2 as the inverse dimensional wavenumber m0 /R:
                                            r
                                               ν
                                       L=        .                                   (14)
                                               ρ

Thus, the ratio ν/ρ controls the length scale L. In addition, ν/ρ impacts the temporal
correlations. Indeed, a higher L implies a redistribution of the variance towards larger
spatial scales (i.e., lower wavenumbers m). But as we noted, in the model Eq.(2), larger
spatial scales correspond to larger time scales τm . As a result, a higher ν/ρ leads to a
larger time scale as well as the length scale L.
    Thirdly, using Eq.(14), we can rewrite Eq.(10) as
                                               1     1
                                        τm =     ·                                                 (15)
                                               ρ 1 + ( Lm
                                                        R
                                                          )2

This equation implies that with L being fixed, all spectral time scales τm are inversely
proportional to ρ, which, thus, determines the physical-space Lagrangian time scale T of
the spatiotemporal random field ξ. We define T as the macroscale (e.g. Yaglom 1987,
Eq.(2.88)) along the characteristic,
                           Z ∞
                                                        1 [1 + ( Lm )2 ]−2
                                            P             P
                      1                        bm τm              R
               T =             γ(t, U t)dt = P       = P                   ,        (16)
                    2Var ξ −∞                   bm      ρ [1 + ( Lm
                                                                  R
                                                                    )2 ]−1

where the second equality is due to Eq.(11), the third equality is due to Eqs.(9) and (15),
and the summations are over m from − n2 + 1 to n2 .
    Technically, Eqs.(14), (16), and (12) allow us to compute the internal model parame-
ters ρ, ν, and σ from the externally specified parameters L, T , and SD(ξ). Conceptually,
we summarize the above conclusions as follows.

   • U does not affect the Lagrangian spatiotemporal covariances. It tilts the Eulerian
     spatiotemporal correlations towards the direction ds = U dt in space-time.

   • The ratio ν/ρ determines the spatial scale L and impacts the time scale T .

   • With the ratio ν/ρ being fixed, ρ controls the time scale T .

   • With ρ and ν being fixed, σ determines the resulting process variance Var ξ.

These conclusions give us an idea how local properties of the spatiotemporal field statistics
are going to be impacted if the parameters θ = (U, ρ, ν, σ) become variable in space and
time.
   2
    One can show that for a dense enough spatial grid, thus defined length scale L almost coincides with
the macroscale Λξ defined below in Eq.(30).




                                                   7
3     Doubly stochastic advection-diffusion-decay model
      (DSADM)
Here, we allow the parameters θ = (U, ρ, ν, σ) of the model Eq.(2) to be spatiotem-
poral random fields by themselves. The resulting model becomes, thus, a three-level
hierarchical model (Wikle et al. 1998, Banerjee et al. 2015). At the first level is
the random field in question ξ(t, s) modeled conditionally on the second-level fields
θ(t, s) = (U (t, s), ρ(t, s), ν(t, s), σ(t, s)), which are controlled by the third-level hyper-
parameters φ. So, to compute a realization of the pseudo-random field ξ(t, s), we first
specify the hyperparameters φ. Then, we compute realizations of the second-level (sec-
ondary or parameter) fields θ(t, s). Finally, we substitute the secondary fields for the
respective parameters in Eq.(2) and solve the resulting equation for the primary field
ξ(t, s).
     The idea behind this extension of the basic model Eq.(2) is the following. If the
secondary fields θ(t, s) vary smoothly in space and time, then, locally, in a vicinity of
some point in space-time (t0 , s0 ), the statistics of the field ξ(t, s) will resemble that for
the stationary model Eq.(2) with constant parameters equal to θ(t, s) frozen at the point
(t0 , s0 ) (see also Lindgren et al. 2011, sec. 3.2). As the statistics of the model Eq.(2)
with constant parameters do depend on the parameters θ (see section 2), the resulting
solution ξ(t, s) to the model Eq.(2) with variable parameters becomes non-stationary in
space-time, with the degree of the non-stationarity controlled by the variability in the
secondary fields θ(t, s).


3.1     First level of the hierarchy: the field in question ξ
At the first level, ξ(t, s) satisfies the basic Eq.(2) with variable in space and time coeffi-
cients,
                   ∂ξ             ∂ξ                       ∂ 2ξ
                      + U (t, s)      + ρ(t, s) ξ − ν(t, s) 2 = σ(t, s) α(t, s).         (17)
                   ∂t             ∂s                       ∂s

3.2     Second level of the hierarchy: parameter fields θ
Each secondary field θ(t, s) (that is, one of the coefficients U (t, s), ρ(t, s), ν(t, s), σ(t, s) of
the first-level Eq.(17)) is modeled as the transformed Gaussian field: θ = gθ (θ∗ , φ). Here
gθ is the (secondary-field specific) transformation function and θ∗ (t, s) is the pre-transform
Gaussian random field satisfying its own stochastic advection-diffusion-decay model Eq.(2)
with constant and non-random coefficients, Uθ , ρθ , νθ , σθ (which are hyperparameters).
    The pointwise transformation gθ : θ∗ (t, s) 7→ θ(t, s) is specified to be linear for U
and nonlinear for the other three parameter fields. The transformation function involves
additional hyperparameters: the “unperturbed” value of θ (a scalar) denoted by the
overbar, θ (such that θ(t, s) = θ if Var θ∗ = 0), and a few additional hyperparameters as
described below.


                                                 8
    Since the pre-transform fields θ∗ (t, s) are governed by the models with constant coef-
ficients, θ∗ (t, s) are stationary in space-time. The transforms gθ are defined to be inde-
pendent of (t, s), therefore the secondary fields θ(t, s) are stationary in space-time, too.
    Next, the computation of the four secondary fields is described, including equations
for the pre-transform random fields and the respective transformation functions.

3.2.1   U (t, s)

The pre-transform Gaussian field U ∗ (t, s) satisfies the basic stochastic model Eq.(2):

                      ∂U ∗      ∂U ∗                ∂ 2U ∗
                           + UU      + ρ U U ∗ − νU        = σU αU (t, s),                 (18)
                       ∂t        ∂s                  ∂s2
where UU , ρU , νU , and σU are constant and non-random hyperparameters and αU is the
white noise independent of α. The transformation U ∗ (t, s) 7→ U (t, s) is simply

                                   U (t, s) = U + U ∗ (t, s),                              (19)

where U is the unperturbed value of U (a non-random scalar).
  From linearity of Eqs.(18) and (19), U (t, s) is a Gaussian random field.

3.2.2   σ(t, s)

The pre-transform Gaussian field σ ∗ (t, s) satisfies

                       ∂σ ∗      ∂σ ∗              ∂ 2σ∗
                            + Uσ      + ρσ σ ∗ − νσ 2 = σσ ασ (t, s).                      (20)
                        ∂t       ∂s                 ∂s
where Uσ , ρσ , νσ , and σσ are the hyperparameters and ασ is the independent white noise
field.
    To define the transformation σ ∗ (t, s) 7→ σ(t, s), we require that the field σ(t, s) should
be positive and have zero probability density at σ = 0. To meet these requirements, we
postulate that
                                    σ(t, s) = σ · g(σ ∗ (t, s)),                            (21)
where σ is the unperturbed value of σ and g(z) is the transformation function selected to
be the scaled and shifted logistic function (also known as the sigmoid function in machine
learning):
                                                1 + eb
                                      g(z) :=          ,                               (22)
                                              1 + eb−z
where b is the constant. The function g(z) has the following property: it behaves like the
ordinary exponential function everywhere except for z  b, where the exponential growth
is tempered (moderated). Indeed, it exponentially decays as z → −∞. Like exp(z), it is
equal to 1 at z = 0. With b > 0, g(z) saturates as z → ∞ at the level 1 + eb ; this is the
main difference of g from the exponential function and the reason why we replace exp(z)
by g(z): to avoid too large values in σ(t, s), which can give rise to unrealistically large


                                               9
                                   logistic(z,b)




                      3.0
                                   exp(z)




                      2.0
                      1.0
                      0.0
                            −4           −2          0            2             4
                                                     z



          Figure 1: Logistic function g(z) with b = 1 and exponential function


spikes in ξ. We will refer to b as the g-function’s saturation hyperparameter. For b = 1,
the function g(z) in plotted in Fig.1 alongside the exponential function.
    Due to nonlinearity of the transformation function g, the field σ(t, s) is non-Gaussian.
Its pointwise distribution is known as logit-normal or logit-Gaussian.

3.2.3   ρ(t, s) and ν(t, s)

The remaining two secondary fields ρ(t, s) and ν(t, s) (denoted here generically by ψ) are
modeled in a way similar to σ(t, s), the only difference being the transformation function.
Specifically, the pre-transform Gaussian field ψ ∗ satisfies

                      ∂ψ ∗      ∂ψ ∗        ∗     ∂ 2ψ∗
                           + Uψ      + ρ ψ ψ − νψ       = σψ αψ (t, s),                  (23)
                       ∂t        ∂s                ∂s2
where, again, Uψ , ρψ , νψ , and σψ , are the hyperparameters and αψ is the independent
white noise field.
   The transformation function is defined here to be

                            ψ(t, s) = ψ · [(1 + εψ ) · g(ψ ∗ (t, s)) − εψ ] ,            (24)

where ψ is the unperturbed value of ψ, the function g is the same as in section 3.2.2 and
controlled by the same saturation hyperparameter b, and εψ is the small non-negative
constant. The hyperparameter εψ is introduced to allow for small negative values of ψ
(that is, of ρ and ν). This will take place if the pre-transform Gaussian field ψ ∗ happens to
take a large negative value. Allowing for negative values of the decay coefficient ρ and the
diffusion coefficient ν is motivated by the desire to introduce an intermittent instability
into the model.
    Like σ(t, s), the fields ρ(t, s) and ν(t, s) are logit-Gaussian.


                                                   10
3.3     Third level of the hierarchy: hyperparameters and external
        parameters
In contrast to the popular Lorenz’96 model (Lorenz & Emanuel 1998), which has only
one parameter F , DSADM has many parameters as discussed above (in total, there are
23 hyperparameters). It is convenient to specify the hyperparameters using a set of more
sensible external parameters as described next.
    The advection velocities U and Uθ (for θ = U, ρ, ν, σ) are specified directly as they
have a clear physical meaning.
    The unperturbed hyperparameters θ = ρ, ν, σ are specified from the unperturbed
external parameters L, T , and SD(ξ) using Eqs.(16), (14), and (12)3 . The latter determine
the desired typical spatial scale, time scale, and variance of the field ξ(t, s). Note that
in the non-stationary regime, L, T , and SD(ξ) are not exactly equal to the mean values
of the length scale, time scale, and variance of ξ(t, s), respectively, because closed-form
expressions for the latter are not available.
    Likewise, for any pre-transform Gaussian field θ∗ = U ∗ , ρ∗ , ν ∗ , σ ∗ , the respective hyper-
parameters ρθ and νθ are calculated from the external parameters Lθ and Tθ using Eqs.(16)
and (14). Lθ and Tθ are the user-specified spatial and temporal scales of non-stationarity.
    The hyperparameters σθ are specified as follows. σU is calculated from the external
parameter SD(U ∗ ) using Eq.(12). For each of the other three secondary fields, θ = ρ, ν, σ,
we select κθ = exp(SD(θ∗ )) to be the respective external parameter. This choice is
motivated by the fact that these fields are nonlinearly transformed Gaussian fields. As g(z)
(defined in Eq.(22) and shown in Fig.1) is a “tempered” exponential function, it is worth
measuring the standard deviation of, say, the σ ∗ field on the log scale: SD(σ ∗ ) = log κσ ,
so that the typical deviation of the transformed field σ from its unperturbed value σ is
κσ times. The external parameters SD(U ∗ ), κσ , κρ , and κν determine the strength of
non-stationarity.
    Finally, for the fields ψ = ρ, ν, we parameterize εψ (which, we recall, controls the
occurrence of negative values of ψ) using the probability πψ that ψ(t, s) is negative:

                                         P (ψ(t, s) < 0) = πψ .                                       (25)

Substituting ψ from Eq.(24) into Eq.(25) and utilizing monotonicity of the transformation
function g and Gaussianity of the field ψ ∗ , we easily come up with a relation between πψ
and εψ (the elementary formulas are omitted). The external parameters πρ and πν thus
determine how often and how strong local instabilities can be. (Actually, πψ slightly
impacts also sup ψ, but this is a minor effect and it can be ignored in this application.)
   To facilitate the use of DSADM, we introduce a reduced set of external parameters
using the following constraints.
   3
    Note that for any field θ, θ is its pointwise median (for θ = U it is also the mean), hence the overbar
notation.



                                                    11
    (i) The unperturbed advection velocity U and all advection velocities Uθ are equal to
each other.
    (ii) The length-scale hyperparameters Lθ for all pre-transform fields θ∗ are selected to
be equal to the common value L∗ , the length scale of non-stationarity.
    (iii) The time-scale hyperparameters T and Tθ are specified to be equal to L/Vchar and
Lθ /Vchar = L∗ /Vchar , respectively, where Vchar is the characteristic velocity.
    (iv) The g-function’s saturation hyperparameter b is set to 1.
    Having selected a meaningful value of Vchar , the user can control the typical time and
length scales of ξ, the strength of non-stationarity, and the time and length scales of
non-stationarity — using the reduced set of the 10 external parameters listed in Table 1.

                       Table 1: Short list of external parameters of DSADM

        External  Dependent       Which feature of the model is controlled?
        parameter hyperparameters
        SD(ξ)            σ                       Mean SD(ξ) (roughly)
        U                U , UU , Uρ , Uν , Uσ   All advection velocities
        L                ρ, ν                    Mean length scale of ξ (roughly)
        L∗               ρU , ρρ , ρν , ρσ       Length scale and time scale
                         νU , νρ , νν , νσ       of non-stationarity
        SD(U ∗ )         σU                      Strength of non-stationarity
        κρ , κν , κσ     σρ , σν , σσ            Strength of non-stationarity
        π ρ , πν         ερ , εν                 Strength of non-stationarity
                                                 (portions of time ρ and ν are negative)




4     Properties and capabilities of DSADM
4.1    Non-stationarity
Here, we show that, given the secondary fields, the solution to DSADM is indeed a non-
stationary in space and time random field. Its spatiotemporal covariances are themselves
random (as they depend on the random secondary fields) and appear to be stationary
processes in space-time.
    Let us rewrite the basic Eq.(17) as the linear stochastic state-space model
                            dξ(t)
                                  = Φ(θ(t)) ξ(t) + Σ(θ(t)) α(t),                      (26)
                             dt
where ξ and θ stand for the vectors of the spatially gridded fields ξ(t, s) and θ(t, s),
respectively, α(t) is the space-discrete and time-continuous white noise, Φ(θ) is the spa-
tial operator dependent on the spatial fields θ, and Σ(θ) is the diagonal matrix whose
application to α represents the forcing term σα in Eq.(17).

                                                    12
    Note that DSADM is intended to be used as a model-of-truth in which the secondary
fields, once computed in an experiment, are held fixed. In this default setting, Eq.(26)
implies that DSADM is a linear non-autonomous stochastic model (because Φ and Σ are
explicit functions of time).
    Discretizing Eq.(26) in time (using an implicit time-differencing scheme) yields the
equation for the time-discrete signal ξ:

                                ξ k = F(θ k )(ξ k−1 + Σ(θ k )αk ),                           (27)

where ξ k is the field on the spatial grid (an n-vector), k = 1, 2, . . . labels the time instant,
F is the model operator, and components of the vector αk are independent Gaussian
variables with mean zero and variance 1/(∆s∆t). Here ∆s = 2πR/n is the spatial grid
spacing and ∆t the time step. The initial condition ξ 0 has mean zero and the known
covariance matrix Γ0 . Equation (27) allows us to find the conditional covariance matrix
of the spatial field ξ k given the secondary fields θ 1:k (the notation 1 : k designates all time
instants from 1 to k), that is, Γk = E(ξ k ξ >k |θ 1:k ), using the recursion


                              Γk = F(θ k ) Γk−1 F(θ k )> + Q(θ k ),                          (28)

where Q = FΣ2 F> /(∆s∆t) is the covariance matrix of the forcing. The lagged covari-
ances Γkj = E(ξ k ξ >                                                                       >
                    j |θ 1:k ) (where j < k) can be found by right-multiplying Eq.(27) by ξ j
and taking expectation (note that for j < k, ξ j is independent of αk ):

                                      Γkj = F(θ k ) Γk−1,j .                                 (29)

Now recall that the secondary fields θ are random fields. Then, Eqs.(28) and (29) imply
that the field (signal) covariances Γk and Γkj are (matrix variate) random processes. It can
be shown that if ρ(t, s) > 0 and ν(t, s) > 0 (for small enough πρ and πν this is true most
of the time), then F (as a matrix operator) is a contraction. Therefore, the dependence
of Γk and Γkj on Γ0 fades out as k → ∞ and only the secondary fields θ determine the
covariances of ξ(t, s). Moreover, since the fields θ are stationary in space-time and F and
Q are space and time invariant (as operators acting on θ), the field covariances Γk and
Γkj are stationary random processes in space-time.
    Below, we will be particularly interested in the following two aspects of the spatial
covariances Γk or, in continuous notation and omitting for brevity the dependence on the
secondary fields, γ(t, t; s, s0 ): (i) the time and space specific field variance Var ξ(t, s) =
γ(t, t; s, s) and (ii) a time and space specific spatial scale defined to be, say, the local
macroscale:                                         Z
                                            1
                           Λξ (t, s) =                      γ(t, t; s, s0 )ds0 .            (30)
                                       2 Var ξ(t, s) S1 (R)
Then, from stationarity of γ(t, t; s, s0 ), it follows that both Var ξ(t, s) and Λξ (t, s) are
stationary in space-time random fields.



                                               13
4.2    Estimation of true covariances
Instead of the recursive computation of the field covariances using Eq.(28), one can esti-
mate them as accurately as needed by running DSADM Eq.(17) P times with independent
realizations of the forcing α(t, s) and with the fields θ(t, s) held fixed. The spatial covari-
ances γ(t, t; s1 , s2 ) can then be estimated from the resulting sample {ξ (p) (t, s)}Pp=1 as the
usual sample covariances.
     More importantly, this approach can be used to estimate time and space-specific true
filtering distributions of any filter in question. Note that these distributions and their
parameters (e.g., true background-error covariances) are hard to obtain even knowing the
model of truth. Indeed, on the one hand, a sub-optimal filter, because of its approximate
nature, can only yield estimates which are inexact and, likely, biased (hence the need for
covariance inflation in EnKF). On the other hand, an exact (e.g., Kalman) filter cannot
be used here either — because the error statistics of the approximate filter and the exact
filter differ.
     To estimate, say, true background-error covariances of a filter, one may use the above
fields {ξ (p) (t, s)}Pp=1 as P “truths”, generate P sets of “synthetic” observations (with
independent errors) in space and time, and perform P assimilation runs. Then, at each
time, one may compute P background-error vectors (by subtracting the truth ξ (p) (t, s)
from the respective background field) and then, finally, compute their (time specific)
sample covariance matrix. We experimented with DSADM on a 60-point spatial grid
and found that the sample size P = 5000–10000 was enough to accurately estimate true
time-specific error covariances (not shown). This approach is similar to that by Bishop &
Satterfield (2013); the difference is that in our approach the truth is random whilst they
assume that the truth is deterministic.


4.3    Instability
The nonlinear deterministic models mentioned in the Introduction are chaotic, that is,
having unstable modes (positive Lyapunov exponents), whereas DSADM is stochastic but
experiencing intermittent instabilities due to the possibility for ρ and ν to attain negative
values. In the deterministic models instabilities are curbed by nonlinearity, whereas in
DSADM, these are limited by the time the random fields ρ and ν remain negative.


4.4    Gaussianity
Given θ, DSADM is linear, hence ξ(t, s) is conditionally Gaussian. Unconditionally, ξ(t, s)
is a continuous mixture of zero-mean Gaussian distributions and so has a non-Gaussian




                                               14
distribution with heavy tails4 .


4.5     Unbeatable benchmark filter
Linearity of DSADM makes it possible to use the exact Kalman filter and thus to know
how far from the optimal performance the filter in question is, which is always useful but
often not possible with nonlinear deterministic models of truth.
    In principle, non-stationarity combined with linearity can be achieved by taking a
nonlinear model (like those mentioned in the Introduction) and using its tangent linear
model. We have tried that with the Lorenz’96 model and found that even a tiny imposed
model-error perturbation leads to an explosive growth of the forecast perturbation. Per-
haps, some diffusion is needed to stabilize the model. This would complicate the model,
but more significantly, the tangent linear model does not allow to explicitly specify the
various characteristics of non-stationarity the DSADM does.


5       Behavior of the model
In this section, we numerically examine solutions to DSADM and some aspects of their
spatiotemporal distributions.


5.1     Model setup
The model’s differential equations were solved numerically using an implicit upwind finite-
difference scheme. The computational grid had n = 60 points on the circle of radius
R = 6370 km. The model integration time step was ∆t = 6h. The external parameters
of DSADM were selected to resemble the spatiotemporal structure of a mid-tropospheric
meteorological field like temperature or geopotential, with one caveat: the time and length
scales were chosen to be about twice as large as the respective meteorological scales (for
the fields to be reasonably resolved on the 60-point spatial grid).
    We specified U = 10 ms−1 , L = 5∆s = 3300 km, L∗ = 2L (it is meaningful to assume
that the structural change in the field occurs at a larger space and time scale than the
change in the random field itself), SD(ξ) = 5 (selected arbitrarily and does not impact
any conclusions), SD(U ∗ ) = 10 ms−1 , b = 1, κρ = κν = κσ = 3, πρ = 0.02, πν = 0.01,
Vchar = 3 ms−1 (tuned to give rise to the desired mean time scale).
    4
     Indeed, one can prove using the Jensen inequality that the kurtosis of a non-degenerate mixture of
this kind (a scale mixture) is always greater than 3 (the Gaussian kurtosis). A positive excess kurtosis
means, normally, more probability mass in the tails of the distribution than in the tails of the Gaussian
distribution with the same mean and variance.




                                                   15
(a)                           Stationary field                (b)                        Non−stationary field
                                                                                                                     30
                                                        10




                 4000




                                                                              4000
                                                                                                                     20
                                                        5




                 3000




                                                                              3000
                                                                                                                     10
       Time, h                                          0




                                                                    Time, h
                                                                                                                     0
                 2000




                                                                              2000
                                                        −5

                                                                                                                     −10
                 1000




                                                                              1000
                                                        −10

                                                                                                                     −20

                                                        −15



                        0   10000     20000     30000                                0   10000     20000     30000
                                    Space, km                                                    Space, km



Figure 2: Realizations of ξ(t, s) generated by: (a) the stationary model Eq.(2), (b) the
non-stationary DSADM Eq.(17).


5.2     ξ(t, s) plots
Figure 2 compares typical spatiotemporal segments of solutions to the stationary stochas-
tic model, Eq.(2), (panel a) and DSADM, Eq.(17), (panel b). One can see that, indeed, the
non-stationary field had different structures at different areas across the domain, whilst
the stationary field had the same structure everywhere. In particular, one can spot areas
where the non-stationary field experienced more small-scale (large-scale) fluctuation than
in the rest of the plot. These spots correspond to small (large) values of the local length
scale Λξ , see below Fig.3(b).


5.3     Non-stationarity
Figure 3 shows two characteristics of the non-stationarity pattern: the local log-variance
log10 (Var ξ(t, s)) and the local length scale Λξ (t, s) (defined in Eq.(30)). Both were calcu-
lated from the spatial covariance matrix Γk computed following Eq.(28). We recall that
the variability in Var ξ(t, s) and Λξ (t, s) was induced by the simulated secondary fields
θ(t, s), on which Fk and Qk depend. The same realizations of the secondary fields were
used to plot both Fig.3 and Fig.2(b). In Fig.3, one can see the substantial degree of non-
stationarity (note that in the stationary case both Var ξ and Λξ are constant). Specifically,
in Fig.3(a), the ratio of the maximum to the minimum field variance Var ξ(t, s) is seen to
be greater than two orders of magnitude. The same ratio for the length scale Λξ (t, s) (see
Fig.3(b)) was about 5, which also indicates a significant degree of variation.
    Figure 4 displays how diverse the true spatial correlations were. Note that Fig.3(a)
illustrates the non-stationarity of the field’s magnitude, whereas Figs.3(b) and 4 highlight
the non-stationarity of the field’s spatial structure.
    Thus, DSADM is capable of generating significantly non-stationary random fields.


                                                              16
(a)                             log10 (Var ξ )                                                      (b)                                      Λ
                                                                                                                                                              10000


                 4000




                                                                                                                       4000
                                                                                              2.0


                                                                                                                                                              8000
                 3000




                                                                                                                       3000
                                                                                              1.5
       Time, h




                                                                                                             Time, h
                                                                                                                                                              6000
                 2000




                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                              1.0


                                                                                                                                                              4000
                 1000




                                                                                                                       1000
                                                                                              0.5


                                                                                                                                                              2000

                                                                                              0.0

                        0   10000                 20000                      30000                                            0   10000     20000     30000
                                      Space, km                                                                                           Space, km



Figure 3: Space-time plots of estimated (a) field log-variance log10 (Var ξ(t, s)), (b) spatial
macroscale Λξ (t, s).




                                                                             Spatial forecast−error correlation
                                                   0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                    Correlation




                                                             −20000                  −10000              0             10000        20000
                                                                                              Distance, km



Figure 4: Spatial correlations of the field ξ with respect to 30 randomly selected points
in space-time.




                                                                                                    17
5.4    Gaussianity
As noted above, conditionally on the secondary fields, ξ(t, s) is Gaussian by construction.
This is the way DSADM is used in this study. In principle, it can be used for other
purposes without conditioning on the secondary fields, so that in each model run both the
forcing and the model coefficients are random (and the model becomes autonomous). In
this setting, the generated field ξ is no longer Gaussian. Numerical experiments confirmed
that the unconditional distribution of ξ(t, s) was indeed non-Gaussian with heavy tails (as
we anticipated in section 4.4). The non-Gaussianity was stronger for larger magnitudes
of the secondary fields (not shown).


5.5    Forward and inverse modeling
Building DSADM can be called forward hierarchical modeling. That is, we have formu-
lated a (hopefully) reasonable hierarchical model and an algorithm to compute realizations
of the first-level random field ξ(t, s) given the third-level hyperparameters φ. A harder
problem is inverse modeling, that is, the inference about the model parameters—in our
case the parameter fields θ(t, s)—from a number of realizations (an ensemble) of the field
ξ. This is the classical hierarchical Bayesian problem, which is beyond the scope of this
study but can be relevant in a broader context of non-stationary spatial and spatiotem-
poral field modeling.


6     Hybrid HBEF (HHBEF) filter
In the rest of the paper, we use DSADM to study the impact of non-stationarity on the
performance of hybrid ensemble filters. We formulate a new filter that extends HBEF
(in which ensemble covariances are blended with recent-past time-smoothed covariances,
see Tsyrulnikov & Rakitko (2017)) by introducing two additional kinds of hybridization
mentioned in the Introduction: blending with climatological covariances (as in EnVar)
and blending with spatially neighboring covariances (spatial smoothing). We start with
a review of HBEF and then introduce HHBEF.


6.1    HBEF
Tsyrulnikov & Rakitko (2017) developed, building on Myrseth & Omre (2010), Bocquet
(2011), Bocquet et al. (2015), their Hierarchical Bayes ensemble Kalman filter (HBEF),
which cyclically updates prior covariances using ensemble members as generalized obser-
vations and the estimated previous-cycle covariances as a background. The (Bayesian)
update relies on the inverse-Wishart matrix-variate hyperprior distribution for the un-
known, and thus assumed random, covariance matrices.
   HBEF updates the model-error and the predictability-error covariance matrices, but
here we consider a simplified design in which the background-error covariance matrix Bk

                                            18
is cyclically updated. In the simplest version of HBEF, the mean-square-optimal posterior
(analysis) estimate Bak of the unknown true matrix Bk is the linear combination of the
background Bfk and the (localized and inflated) sample covariance matrix, Bek :

                                            ϑBfk + N Bek
                                    Bak =                ,                               (31)
                                              ϑ+N
where N is the ensemble size and ϑ > 0 the so-called sharpness parameter of the inverse
Wishart distribution (defined in Appendix A in Tsyrulnikov & Rakitko (2017)). The
background Bfk is provided by the persistence forecast:

                                        Bfk = Bak−1 .                                    (32)

    The matrix Bak computed according to Eq.(31) is used in the analysis of the state ξ k as
the background-error covariance matrix. The posterior (analysis) ensemble is generated
in HBEF (and in all other filters in this study) in the same way as in the stochastic EnKF
(e.g., Houtekamer & Zhang 2016).
    From Eqs.(31) and (32), it follows that Bak satisfies the first-order autoregressive equa-
tion
                                Bak = µBak−1 + (1 − µ)Bek ,                               (33)
where µ = ϑ/(ϑ + N ) < 1. Equation (33) implies a kind of time smoothing of ensemble
covariances. In particular, Bak−1 is the time-smoothed recent-past ensemble covariance
matrix denoted in what follows by Brk . With this notation, Eq.(33) shows that Bak is a
(convex) linear combination of Brk and Bek . The role of Brk in HBEF is two-fold. First,
if spatial non-stationarity has some memory (which is highly likely in realistic systems),
then Brk brings this past memory to the current assimilation cycle, improving the accuracy
of the resulting estimate of the true background-error covariance matrix Bk . Second, due
to time smoothing (i.e., averaging), the sampling noise is reduced, leading to a more
accurate estimate Bak .


6.2    HHBEF: blending with static covariances
The first idea of the new hybrid-HBEF (HHBEF) filter is to replace the HBEF’s per-
sistence forecast for the covariance matrix Bk (Eq.(32)) with a regression-to-the-mean
forecast:
                                Bfk = wBak−1 + (1 − w)Bc .                         (34)
Here, Bc is the climatological covariance matrix and w ∈ [0, 1] is the scalar weight.


6.3    Spatial smoothing of the covariances
The second idea of HHBEF is to accommodate spatially smoothed ensemble covariances.
Here, we review the approach by Buehner & Charron (2007), who studied spectral-space
localization, found it useful in reducing sampling noise, and noted that it is equivalent to

                                              19
a spatial smoothing of the covariance function — see their Eq.(9), which we rewrite here
as                                    Z
                       B̌(s1 , s2 ) =    κ(s) B(s1 − s, s2 − s)ds,                  (35)
                                      S1 (R)

where the check ˇ designates the smoothing and κ(s) ≥ 0 is the weighting (averaging)
function. In the space-discrete case, Eq.(35) can be approximated as follows:
                                           n/2
                                           X
                                Bii0 =              κs Bi−s,i0 −s ,                     (36)
                                         s=−n/2+1
                                       P
where κs ≥ 0 are the weights such that   κs = 1. In the matrix form Eq.(36) can be
written as
                                     n/2
                                    X
                              B̌ =        κs F s BF −s ,                      (37)
                                      s=−n/2+1

where F is the forward-shift operator. From Eq.(37) with non-negative κs and given that
F −1 = F > , it immediately follows that the smoothing is properly defined in the sense
that the resulting smoothed covariance matrix B̌ is non-negatively definite.
   If B = N1−1 el e>
                 P
                      l , where el is the l-th ensemble perturbation, l = 1, . . . , N , then
Eq.(37) implies that the spatial smoothing of the sample covariance matrix can be per-
formed by spatially shifting (through the repeated application of the forward and back-
                                                                     √
ward shift operators) and weighting (through the multiplication by κs ) ensemble per-
turbations — as it was proposed and tested by Buehner & Charron (2007).


6.4    HHBEF’s hybrid covariances
Combining Eq.(34) with Eq.(31), where Be is replaced by its spatially smoothed version
B̌e computed according to Eq.(37), yields the HHBEF’s analog of the HBEF’s Eq.(33):

                        Bak = µwBak−1 + (1 − µ)B̌ek + µ(1 − w)Bc ,                      (38)

where µ is the weight of Bfk relative to B̌ek . Solving Eq.(38) (which is a forced linear
difference equation; the derivation is omitted) shows that, for µw < 1 and after an initial
transient, Bak has the four components:

                          Bak = we Bek + wes Bes      r       c
                                              k + wr Bk + wc B ,                        (39)

where we = (1 − µ)κ0 is the weight of the current ensemble covariances Bek , wes = (1 −
µ)(1 − κ0 ) is the weight of the spatially smoothed current ensemble covariances Bes k =
  e    e                                                                           c
B̌k − Bk , wc = µ(1 − w)/(1 − µw) is the weight of the climatological covariances B , and
wr = µw(1 − µ)/(1 − µw) is the weight of the spatiotemporally-smoothed recent-past
ensemble covariances Brk :

                         r   B̌ek−1 + µwB̌ek−2 + (µw)2 B̌ek−3 + . . .
                        Bk =                       2
                                                                      .                 (40)
                                      1 + µw + (µw) + . . .

                                               20
The smoothing time scale (measured in assimilation cycles) is −1/ log(µw).
    Equations (37) and (38) show that w = 1 and κs = δs0 (where δs0 is the Kronecker
delta) reduces HHBEF to HBEF, w = 0 to EnVar, µ = 0 and κs = δs0 to pure EnKF,
and w = 0, µ = 1 recovers the filter with static background-error covariances.
    Thus, HHBEF employs blending of (localized) sample covariances with both climato-
logical and spatiotemporally-smoothed background-error covariances.


7     Performance of the three covariance-blending tech-
      niques under non-stationarity
In this section, we experimentally study how temporal smoothing of background-error
covariances, their spatial smoothing, and their mixing with climatology affects the per-
formance of the classical stochastic EnKF (e.g., Houtekamer & Zhang 2016) and HHBEF
under different regimes of non-stationarity.


7.1    “Twin” experimental methodology
In the experiments below, the truth was generated using the discretized Eq.(17), that
is, Eq.(27): ξ k = Fk ξ k−1 + εk , where εk is the time and space-discrete model forcing.
The forecast operator Fk was available to the filters, so that, given the analysis ξ ak−1 , the
next-time-instant forecast was ξ fk = Fk ξ ak−1 . In this setting, the model forcing εk becomes
the model error (see, e.g., Tsyrulnikov & Gayfulin (2017)), with its covariance matrix Qk
also available to the filters. We reiterate that in each experiment, the secondary fields
(which determine the forecast operator and the model-error statistics), once generated,
were kept fixed.
    The above setting implies that non-identical true and model twins were used, with the
only difference between the two models being the stochastic model error. In contrast to
using different models to generate the truth and to perform the forecast, this approach
provides us with the exact knowledge (and in principle, full control) of the model error
statistics. It is this knowledge (along with linearity) that justifies the use of the exact
Kalman filter.


7.2    Data assimilation setup
The default DSADM setup was the same as in section 5.1. The default ensemble size
was N = 10. The setup of the filters and the observation network were chosen with the
intention to mimic — as much as possible with a 1D model — the setup of a realistic
meteorological data assimilation scheme.
    The time interval between consecutive analyses, Ta , was selected using the follow-
ing criterion. The DSADM field correlation with lag Ta should approach the typical
meteorological-field correlation at lag 6h (the most widely used in operational practice

                                              21
assimilation cycle in global schemes). On the one hand, the mid-tropospheric 6h time
correlation was estimated by Seaman (1975, Fig.1(b)) using radiosonde data to be about
0.8 for the wind fields and can be interpolated to the value of about 0.95 for geopotential
(Olevskaya 1968) (that is, about 0.9 on average). On the other hand, this 0.9 correlation
in the DSADM field (with the default setup) occurred, on average, at the 12h lag. So,
we set Ta = 12h. This is twice the typical assimilation cycle in real-world systems and
is consistent with the selection of L and T in section 5.1 (about twice as large as the
respective typical scales of meteorological fields).
    Observations were generated every assimilation cycle at every 10th spatial grid point.
The observation error standard deviation (=6) was selected to ensure that the mean
reduction of the forecast-error variance in the analysis was close to the value of 10%
reported by Errico & Privé (2014, section 8) for a realistic data assimilation system.
    The weights of the spatial covariance smoothing κs (see Eq.(37)) were specified to be a
triangular function of the spatial shift s, so that κs had a maximum at s = 0 and vanished
for |s| > smax . Thus, the spatial smoothing was controlled by the single parameter smax
(the length scale of the spatial smoothing measured in grid spacings).
    The covariance localization was performed using the popular function by Gaspari &
Cohn (1999, Eq.(4.10)).


7.3    Setup of experiments
The relative roles of the three covariance-blending devices were studied by measuring, first,
the performance of EnKF with each device switched on (in turn) vs. the pure EnKF, and
second, by measuring the performance of HHBEF with each device switched off (again,
in turn) vs. the full HHBEF. Switching on (off) the mixing with climatology is denoted
by +C (−C). Similarly, switching on (off) the spatial smoothing of background-error
covariances is denoted by +S (−S) and the temporal smoothing by +T (−T ). Technically,
all filters were built within HHBEF.
    Each filtering configuration was defined by the triple of the covariance-blending pa-
rameters w, µ, and smax as indicated in Table 2. In each experiment, the free parameters
marked in the respective row of Table 2 as “Tuned” as well as the multiplicative covari-
ance inflation and the length scale of the covariance localization were all simultaneously
manually tuned to get the best performance. The tuning was sometimes tedious but the
optimum was always well defined and there was no indication that it was not unique. The
search for the optimum was facilitated by the observation that the better the performance
of a filter, the less need for any covariance-regularization device.
    The performance of a filter, f, was measured by its background root-mean-square error
(brmse, with respect to the known truth, in runs with 5000 assimilation cycles) relative
to that of the exact Kalman filter (KF):

                                          brmse(f) − brmse(KF)
                           rel.err(f) =                        .                        (41)
                                               brmse(KF)

                                              22
                             Table 2: Configurations of filters

                     Filter                    w          µ        smax
                     EnKF                   No effect     0         0
                     EnKF +C (EnVar)           0        Tuned       0
                     EnKF +S                No effect     0       Tuned
                     EnKF +T (HBEF)            1        Tuned       0
                     HHBEF                   Tuned      Tuned     Tuned
                     HHBEF −C                  1        Tuned     Tuned
                     HHBEF −S                Tuned      Tuned       0
                     HHBEF −T                  0        Tuned     Tuned



    The climatological background-error covariance matrix Bc was specified in each ex-
periment to be the time-mean KF’s background-error covariance matrix (in a run with
50,000 assimilation cycles) — for simplicity and in an attempt to reproduce the realistic
situation in which only a proxy to Bc is available.


7.4     Results
As noted in section 3.3, the non-stationarity grows with the increasing external parameters
SD(U ∗ ), κρ , κν , κσ , πρ , πν . Here we compare the filters in four regimes with different
strengths of non-stationarity as detailed in Table 3.

      Table 3: External parameters of DSADM in the four regimes of non-stationarity

            #   Regime                     SD(U ∗ ) κρ = κν = κσ        πρ   πν
            0   Stationary                    0           1             0    0
            1   Weakly non-stationary         5           2            0.01  0
            2   Default non-stationary       10           3            0.02 0.01
            3   Strongly non-stationary      20           6            0.04 0.02


    Figure 5 shows the performance scores (defined in Eq.(41)) for the four configurations
indicated in the upper half of Table 2 plus the full HHBEF. One can see that all three
covariance-blending techniques were quite successful in improving the performance of
EnKF. This could be expected because the ensemble size N = 10 was rather small.
    Static covariances were most useful in the low non-stationarity regimes (non-
stationarity strengths 0 and 1) while being least useful under strong non-stationarity.
This is reasonable because under stationarity, static covariances suffice for exact filtering,
whilst they become useless when the filtering-error statistics are, typically, very different
from climatology, which is the case in a highly non-stationary regime.


                                             23
                                                             EnKF
                                                             EnKF +C (=EnVar)




                                                  0.04
                                                             EnKF +S




                     Relative performance score
                                                             EnKF +T (=HBEF)
                                                             HHBEF




                                                  0.03
                                                  0.02
                                                  0.01
                                                  0.00




                                                         0              1            2          3
                                                                 Strength of non−stationarity



Figure 5: Performance scores (relative to KF, the lower the better) of the pure EnKF (the
upper curve), EnKF with one of the three covariance-blending devices switched on (the
three lower curves), and HHBEF (the lowest curve). The filters’ notation follows Table
2. The numbers on the x-axis correspond to the numbers in the first column of Table 3.


    The temporal covariance smoothing is seen to be beneficial in all regimes, espe-
cially under strong non-stationarity, and always more efficient than the spatial covariance
smoothing. The reason for the observed systematic advantage of the temporal covariance
smoothing over the spatial covariance smoothing is unclear. We may conjecture that
neighboring-in-space covariances bring less information because they are part of the same
sample covariance matrix, whereas neighboring-in-time covariances come from a different
sample covariance matrix and can therefore be more independent.
    It is seen in Fig.(5) that HHBEF was more accurate than the other filters.
    To check if the three covariance-blending techniques remained beneficial when used in
combination, the four configurations indicated in the lower half of Table 2 were compared:
HHBEF vs. HHBEF with one of the three covariance-blending devices withheld. Figure
6 displays the results, which were, generally, consistent with those depicted in Fig.5.
Under non-stationarity, all three blending devices remained usefulr if used jointly except
for the strongly non-stationary regime 3, where only time smoothing was beneficial. Not
using static covariances led to the worst performance under stationarity and low non-
stationarity. Switching off the time smoothing was most detrimental for the default and
strong non-stationarity.
    It is also of interest to inspect the optimal HHBEF’s weights: we , wes , wr , and wc (see
Eq.(39) and the paragraph after it). The weights are plotted in Fig.7 for the same four
strengths of non-stationarity as above. Overall, we see that the two dominant sources of

                                                                            24
                                                  0.030
                                                              HHBEF
                                                              HHBEF −C
                                                              HHBEF −S




                     Relative performance score
                                                              HHBEF −T




                                                  0.020
                                                  0.010
                                                  0.000




                                                          0              1           2          3
                                                                 Strength of non−stationarity



Figure 6: Same as Fig.5, but for the full HHBEF and HHBEF with one of the three
covariance-blending devices switched off.


hybrid covariances were static covariances (prevailing in the low non-stationarity regimes)
and spatiotemporally-smoothed covariances (most important if the non-stationarity was
high). The role of non-smoothed ensemble covariances increased with the growing non-
stationarity. This is meaningful because any covariance blending reduces sampling noise
but distorts the flow-dependent signal carried by the non-smoothed ensemble covariances,
and this distortion grows when the covariances become more variable. The spatially
averaged covariances were beneficial only for non-stationarity strengths 1 and 2 and useless
under the strong non-stationarity (and of course under stationarity). This is consistent
with Fig.6.
    We also studied how the effects of the three covariance-blending techniques depend
on the time and length scales of non-stationarity (determined by the external parameter
L∗ , see Table 1). We found that the effects were quite stable, while blending with spa-
tially and spatiotemporally-smoothed covariances was more beneficial for larger L∗ (not
shown). This can be expected because space and time smoothing is worthwhile only if
the covariances vary smoothly in space and time.
    Finally, we explored the performance of the three covariance-blending techniques for
large ensembles (N = 80 and N = 300) under the default non-stationarity. First, we
found that for those ensembles, some covariance regularization was still useful. This is
reasonable because for the non-regularized sample covariance matrix to be a good esti-
mator of the true covariance matrix, the sample size must be significantly greater than
the dimensionality of the matrix, see e.g., Bai & Shi (2011, Section 2), that is, N  n,
where, we recall, n = 60 in our experiments. Second, the effects of all five regularization

                                                                             25
                                      Weights of B_c, B_e, B_es, B_r
                               1.00




                               0.75



                                                                               Sector




                     weights
                                                                                  w_c
                               0.50                                               w_e
                                                                                  w_es
                                                                                  w_r



                               0.25




                               0.00

                                       0            1              2       3
                                                Nonstationarity_Strength



Figure 7: Optimal blending weights of climatological covariances, wc , non-smoothed cur-
rent ensemble covariances, we , spatially smoothed current ensemble covariances, wes , and
spatiotemporally-smoothed recent-past covariances, wr . The numbers on the x-axis cor-
respond to the numbers in the first column of Table 3.


techniques (the three blending devices plus covariance localization and multiplicative co-
variance inflation) were significantly reduced as compared with the ensemble sizes N = 10
(see above) and N = 30 (not shown), which is, of course, meaningful. Third, the effect of
blending with climatology was negligibly small (because two factors — variability in the
covariances and large ensemble size — both reduce the usefulness of static covariances).
Fourth, the effects of time and space smoothing remained positive, with time smoothing
being still more useful. Fifth, only with huge ensembles (N = 3000), EnKF needed no
covariance regularization anymore (not shown).


8     Conclusions
In this paper we have presented a new doubly stochastic advection-diffusion-decay model
(DSADM) on the circle. Double stochasticity means that not only the model forcing is
stochastic, the model coefficients (parameters) are random as well. The parameters are
specified to be transformed Gaussian random fields, with each Gaussian field satisfying its
own stochastic advection-diffusion-decay model with constant coefficients. Thus, DSADM
is hierarchical, built of linear stochastic partial differential equations at two levels in the
hierarchy. DSADM is designed to be used as a toy model of truth to test and develop
data assimilation methodologies.
    The main advantage of DSADM is its capability of generating spatiotemporal random

                                                            26
fields with tunable non-stationarity in space and time, while maintaining linearity and
Gaussianity. This allows one, first, to separate effects of non-stationarity from effects of
nonlinearity and non-Gaussianity (which is impossible with nonlinear models of truth).
Second, linearity and Gaussianity allow the use of the Kalman filter as an unbeatable
benchmark, which, again, is rarely possible with nonlinear models. With a small mod-
ification, DSADM can also be used to study the role of non-Gaussianity not caused by
nonlinearity (say, non-Gaussianity of observation or model errors).
     We have used DSADM to study the impact of non-stationarity on the performance
of the following three covariance regularization techniques in EnKF: blending with
static, time-smoothed, and space-smoothed background-error covariances. DSADM and
the synthetic observation network were set up to resemble (as far as possible with a
one-dimensional model) a realistic meteorological data assimilation system. We found
that blending with static covariances was most beneficial in filtering regimes with low
non-stationarity, while time-smoothing was most useful under medium and high non-
stationarity. Space-smoothing was less efficient than time-smoothing. These findings
were valid in a wide range of ensemble sizes. The role of time and space smoothing
was found larger when the length and time scales of non-stationarity patterns were larger
than the respective scales of the background-error field itself. A new filter termed HHBEF
(Hybrid Hierarchical Bayes Ensemble Filter) that combines all three covariance-blending
techniques proved to be most accurate among all configurations of the filters tested.
     We believe that these results are relevant for real-world applications, but of course
they are model dependent and the degree of relevance remains to be verified, especially
because the model is new.
     Thus, the optimal blend of ensemble covariances with climatology as well as with time-
smoothed and space-smoothed background-error covariances is found to strongly depend
on characteristics of non-stationarity. How large is the actual non-stationarity of the
spatiotemporal background-error field in practical data assimilation systems, how large
are the time and space scales of non-stationarity patterns as compared to the respective
scales of the background-error field itself, how non-stationarity depends on the weather
situation, season, scale, altitude, meteorological field, observation density and accuracy—
all these questions remain open. Addressing these questions may help optimize hybrid
filters that accommodate various covariance regularization techniques.


Acknowledgments
Valuable comments of two anonymous reviewers helped improve the paper significantly.




                                            27
References
Apte, A., Auroux, D. & Ramaswamy, M. (2010), ‘Variational data assimilation for discrete
 Burgers equation’, Electron. J. Diff. Equ. 19, 15–30.

Arnold, L. (1974), Stochastic differential equations, Wiley.

Bai, J. & Shi, S. (2011), ‘Estimating high dimensional covariance matrices and its appli-
  cations’, Ann. Econ. Finance 12(2), 199–215.

Banerjee, S., Carlin, B. P. & Gelfand, A. E. (2015), Hierarchical modeling and analysis
  for spatial data, CRC Press.

Berre, L., Varella, H. & Desroziers, G. (2015), ‘Modelling of flow-dependent ensemble-
  based background-error correlations using a wavelet formulation in 4D-Var at Météo-
  France’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 141(692), 2803–2812.

Bishop, C. H. & Satterfield, E. A. (2013), ‘Hidden error variance theory. Part I: Exposition
  and analytic model’, Mon. Weather Rev. 141(5), 1454–1468.

Bocquet, M. (2011), ‘Ensemble Kalman filtering without the intrinsic need for inflation’,
  Nonlin. Process. Geophys. 18(5), 735–750.

Bocquet, M., Raanes, P. N. & Hannart, A. (2015), ‘Expanding the validity of the ensemble
  Kalman filter without the intrinsic need for inflation’, Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics
  22(6), 645–662.

Bonavita, M., Hólm, E., Isaksen, L. & Fisher, M. (2016), ‘The evolution of the ECMWF
  hybrid data assimilation system’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 142(694), 287–303.

Buehner, M. & Charron, M. (2007), ‘Spectral and spatial localization of background-error
  correlations for data assimilation’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 133(624), 615–630.

Buehner, M., Morneau, J. & Charette, C. (2013), ‘Four-dimensional ensemble-variational
  data assimilation for global deterministic weather prediction’, Nonlin. Process. Geophys.
  20(5), 669–682.

Chatfield, C. (2016), The analysis of time series: an introduction, Chapman and
 Hall/CRC.

Dunlop, M. M., Girolami, M. A., Stuart, A. M. & Teckentrup, A. L. (2018), ‘How deep
 are deep Gaussian processes?’, J. Machine Learn. Res. 19(1), 2100–2145.

Errico, R. M. & Privé, N. C. (2014), ‘An estimate of some analysis-error statistics using
  the Global Modeling and Assimilation Office observing-system simulation framework’,
  Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 140(680), 1005–1012.



                                            28
Gaspari, G. & Cohn, S. E. (1999), ‘Construction of correlation functions in two and three
 dimensions’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 125(554), 723–757.

Gustafsson, N., Bojarova, J. & Vignes, O. (2014), ‘A hybrid variational ensemble data
 assimilation for the HIgh Resolution Limited Area Model (HIRLAM)’, Nonlin. Process.
 Geophys. 21(1), 303–323.

Hamill, T. M. & Snyder, C. (2000), ‘A hybrid ensemble Kalman filter – 3D variational
  analysis scheme’, Mon. Weather Rev. 128(8), 2905–2919.

Hansen, J. A. & Smith, L. A. (2001), ‘Probabilistic noise reduction’, Tellus A 53(5), 585–
  598.

Houtekamer, P. & Zhang, F. (2016), ‘Review of the ensemble Kalman filter for atmospheric
  data assimilation’, Mon. Wea. Rev. 144(12), 4489–4532.

Kumar, P. R. & Varaiya, P. (2015), Stochastic systems: Estimation, identification, and
 adaptive control, Vol. 75, SIAM.

Ledoit, O. & Wolf, M. (2004), ‘A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional covari-
  ance matrices’, J. Multivar. Anal. 88(2), 365–411.

Lindgren, F., Rue, H. & Lindström, J. (2011), ‘An explicit link between Gaussian fields
  and Gaussian Markov random fields: the stochastic partial differential equation ap-
  proach’, J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B 73(4), 423–498.

Lorenc, A. C. (2003), ‘The potential of the ensemble Kalman filter for NWP — a com-
  parison with 4D-Var’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 129(595), 3183–3203.

Lorenc, A. C. (2017), ‘Improving ensemble covariances in hybrid variational data assimi-
  lation without increasing ensemble size’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 143(703), 1062–
  1072.

Lorenz, E. (1963), ‘Deterministic nonperiodic flow’, J. Atmos. Sci. 20(2), 130–141.

Lorenz, E. (2005), ‘Designing chaotic models’, J. Atmos. Sci. 62(5), 1574–1587.

Lorenz, E. N. & Emanuel, K. A. (1998), ‘Optimal sites for supplementary weather obser-
  vations: Simulation with a small model’, J. Atmos. Sci. 55(3), 399–414.

Ménétrier, B. & Auligné, T. (2015), ‘Optimized localization and hybridization to filter
 ensemble-based covariances’, Mon. Weather Rev. 143(10), 3931–3947.

Ménétrier, B., Montmerle, T., Michel, Y. & Berre, L. (2015), ‘Linear filtering of sample co-
 variances for ensemble-based data assimilation. Part I: Optimality criteria and applica-
 tion to variance filtering and covariance localization’, Mon. Weather Rev. 143(5), 1622–
 1643.

                                             29
Miller, R. N., Ghil, M. & Gauthiez, F. (1994), ‘Advanced data assimilation in strongly
 nonlinear dynamical systems’, J. Atmos. Sci. 51(8), 1037–1056.

Muccino, J. & Bennett, A. (2002), ‘Generalized inversion of the Korteweg–de Vries equa-
 tion’, Dyn. Atmos. Oceans 35(3), 227–263.

Myrseth, I. & Omre, H. (2010), ‘Hierarchical ensemble Kalman filter’, SPE Journal
 15(2), 569–580.

Olevskaya, S. M. (1968), ‘The use of the canonical-correlation method in analyzing the
  geopotential field’, Izv. Atmos. Ocean. Phys. 4, 1149–1159.

Piterbarg, L. & Ostrovskii, A. (2013), Advection and diffusion in random media: impli-
  cations for sea surface temperature anomalies, Springer Science & Business Media.

Roininen, L., Girolami, M., Lasanen, S. & Markkanen, M. (2016), ‘Hyperpriors for Matérn
  fields with applications in Bayesian inversion’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.02989 .

Seaman, R. (1975), ‘Distance-time autocorrelation functions for winds in the Australian
  region’, Austral. Meteorol. Mag. 23(2), 27–40.

Sigrist, F., Künsch, H. R. & Stahel, W. A. (2015), ‘Stochastic partial differential equation
  based modelling of large space-time data sets’, J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B 77(1), 3–33.

Tjøstheim, D. (1986), ‘Some doubly stochastic time series models’, J. Time Ser. Anal.
  7(1), 51–72.

Tsyroulnikov, M. D. (2001), ‘Proportionality of scales: An isotropy-like property of geo-
  physical fields’, Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 127(578), 2741–2760.

Tsyrulnikov, M. & Gayfulin, D. (2016), ‘A spatio-temporal stochastic pattern generator
  for simulation of uncertainties in geophysical ensemble prediction and ensemble data
  assimilation’, arXiv:1605.02018 .

Tsyrulnikov, M. & Gayfulin, D. (2017), ‘A limited-area spatio-temporal stochastic pattern
  generator for simulation of uncertainties in ensemble applications’, Meteorol. Zeitschrift
  26(5), 549–566.

Tsyrulnikov, M. & Rakitko, A. (2017), ‘A hierarchical Bayes ensemble Kalman filter’,
  Physica D 338, 1–16.

Whittle, P. (1986), Systems in stochastic equilibrium, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Wikle, C. K., Berliner, L. M. & Cressie, N. (1998), ‘Hierarchical Bayesian space-time
 models’, Environ. Ecol. Stat. 5(2), 117–154.

Yaglom, A. M. (1987), Correlation theory of stationary and related random functions,
  Volume 1: Basic results, Springer Verlag.

                                             30
